Applying GHA to specific repos (#12)
fhdsl/GitHub_Automation_for_Scientists: 08-gha-applying-examples.Rmd

# Applying GitHub Actions Examples

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE }
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1x0Cnk2Wcsg8HYkmXnXo_0PxmYCxAwzVrUQzb8DUDvTA/edit#slide=id.g290614d43ec_0_57")
```

> A great way to learn GitHub Actions is to borrow a yaml file someone else has written to your own project. In this chapter we will introduce you to two GitHub Actions and encourage you to adapt one or both of them to one of your own projects. We encourage you to follow these similar steps and tips for other actions that are written on the internet that you may find that you can use for your project.

Author: ```suggestion
A great way to learn GitHub Actions is to borrow a yaml file someone else has written and incorporate it into your own project. In this chapter we will introduce you to two GitHub Actions and encourage you to adapt one or both of them to one of your own projects. We encourage you to follow these similar steps and tips for other actions that are written on the internet that you may find that you can use for your project.
```

```
From command line:
```
`git checkout -b "example-ghas"`
```

2. For this exercise we are going to copy over a second GitHub Action YAML file from the folder. This time, move the `spell-check.yml` and `style-code.yml` files to your `.github/workflows` directories.

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE }
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1x0Cnk2Wcsg8HYkmXnXo_0PxmYCxAwzVrUQzb8DUDvTA/edit#slide=id.g280d2b56f79_0_3293")
```
From command line:
```
mv activity-4-sample-github-actions/* .github/workflows/
```

3. Now follow the same set of steps we used in the previous chapter to Add, Commit, Push the changes.

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE }
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1x0Cnk2Wcsg8HYkmXnXo_0PxmYCxAwzVrUQzb8DUDvTA/edit#slide=id.g290614d43ec_0_205")
```
From command line:
```
git add .github/*
git commit -m "adding even more ghas"
git push --set-upstream origin example-ghas
```

4. Now create a pull request with the changes you just made.

> 5. On your pull request page on GitHub, click on the Details button next to your workflow run.

Author: ```suggestion
5. On your pull request page on GitHub, click on the Details button next to each of these workflow runs. Before moving on to the next section, take a look at the logs and yaml files and practice getting an idea of what these GitHub Actions are doing. 
```

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE }
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1x0Cnk2Wcsg8HYkmXnXo_0PxmYCxAwzVrUQzb8DUDvTA/edit#slide=id.g280d2b56f79_0_3301")
```

### Diving deeper

In this section, we'll give you the basic recipe of these GitHub Actions. Hopefully by having a basic idea of what is in these actions you'll be able to adapt them for your own purposes.

#### Spell Check Overview

> Here's the basic set up of the steps here with links that are included with more information about the resources used at each step.

Author: ```suggestion
We'll run through the yaml file and explain the basic set up here. We also have included links about the resources used at each step. We encourage you to poke around with these resources and with this yaml file to really learn about what these actions are doing. 
```

  uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
  # These arguments underneath `with` are generally action specific so we have to check the documentation: https://github.com/marketplace/actions/upload-a-build-artifact
  with:
    name: spell-check-results
    path: spell_check_results.tsv
```
Archive spelling errors using [`actions/upload-artifact@v3`](https://github.com/actions/upload-artifact). For Archived files, we can see them by going to `Summary` on the left side of the log page and scrolling down to the `Artifacts` section. This file we uploaded will tell us the spell check error our script detected.

```
# If there are too many spelling errors, this will stop the workflow
- name: Check spell check results - fail if too many errors
  # Here we are only going to through an error if there's more than 3 spell check errors detected
  if: ${{ steps.spell_check_run.outputs.sp_chk_results > 3 }}
  run: exit 1
```

We've discussed in previous chapters about conditional statements and using GitHub variables. Here we are using a conditional statement that will fail this GitHub Action if there are too many spelling errors (which here we've said is `3`).

#### Style Code Overview

> Here's the basic set up of the steps of the styling code GitHub action with links that are included with more information about the resources used at each step.

Author: ```suggestion
Just as we did with the spell check action, we'll run through the yaml file and explain the basic set up here. We also have included links about the resources used at each step. We encourage you to poke around with these resources and with this yaml file to really learn about what these actions are doing. 
```

```
style-code:
  runs-on: ubuntu-latest
  # This image has R and basic R packages
  container:
    image: rocker/tidyverse:4.0.2
```
We're using a Docker image that has some R packages we will use so we don't have to install everything individually: [`rocker/tidyverse:4.0.2`](https://hub.docker.com/r/rocker/tidyverse/tags)

```
# Need to get the files specific to our branch from our pull request
- name: Checkout files
  uses: actions/checkout@v3
  with:
    ref: ${{ github.event.pull_request.head.ref }}
```

> We need this files in this repo. So we are checking out the files we need using [`actions/checkout@v3`](https://github.com/actions/checkout)

Author: ```suggestion
We need this files in this repo. So we are checking out the files we need using [`actions/checkout@v3`](https://github.com/actions/checkout).
```

```
In this step we are immediately merging any changed files that were styled back to the original branch that this pull request was on.

The `||` allow these steps an alternative if there are no changes to commit. Without the `||` the action would break if the styling did not result in changes.

What you'll need to change here is the `git config` steps to use your own credentials. (aka `git config --global user.email "itcrtrainingnetwork@gmail.com"` should be your email).

### Tips for adapting these to your own repository

Here's how you can adapt these to your own repository.

First, you'll want to add them to your own repository with a pull request. These actions will both be triggered by a pull request so you won't need to edit them at all to start developing them to adapt them to your project needs.

Note that for the spell check action, if you are deciding to use the customized script we included, you will need to copy that to the same file path as called in this action.

Besides the points of customization you may need to work on that we discussed; you may also need to edit the Docker images used depending on what steps and uses you need.

> From here, its basically good luck! Take it one troubleshooting tactic at a time, Google your problems and look for GitHub Action marketplace actions that fit your needs. Best of luck!

Author: ```suggestion
From here, its basically good luck! Take it one troubleshooting tactic at a time, Google your problems and look for GitHub Action marketplace actions that fit your needs. Best of luck!

```
